>> hello and welcome to the Haskell Weekly
podcast as you might have guessed this
show is about Haskell a purely
functional programming language
I'm your host Dustin Segers a software
engineer here at IT Pro TV
>> and I'm
Jose Silvestri an intern at ITProTV
>> today we'll be talking about functional
reactive programming I guess we should
go ahead and set expectations here gonna
be just doing a general overview right
>> yeah and as I understand that there's a
lot of debate about what counts as FRP I
was like coming from the camp of Conal
just sort of wanting to go back to the
pure definition of very concretely
defined denotational semantics of what
FRP is what a constitutes of so we're
mostly going to focus on that because I
just thought it would be an interesting
starting point just for exploration of
this topic given that historically it's
sort of the starting point of as far as
I understand it
>> okay Jose so what do we
mean by FRP or functional reactive
programming just doing a brief dive
myself I saw stuff about behaviors and
events could you explain more about that
>> when we have a problem where our program
is constantly interacting with its
environment
>> mm-hmm
>> obviously to a
certain extent our outside world is
continuous and usually the values that
we want to deal with evolve continuously
over time so we want a way to be able to
handle that in a way that semantically
reflects the continuous nature of these
values but since we are working in a
computer that's discrete eventually we
do need to discretize this problem but
the advent of FRP is that you delay the
discretization in favor of modularity
and composability
and having a more concrete and rigorous
way of speaking about our problem it's
sort of taking your problem wholemeal
you are looking at the dynamics of your
problem
and then you discretize the advantage of
this that first of all you're not making
assumptions about the behavior right
away
>> okay
>> for example an example it's
given quite a bit it's the difference
between bitmaps and vector graphics
>> mm-hmm
>> with bitmaps you're already
committing yourself to a certain
resolution a certain behavior with
vector graphics your logic itself is
continuous
it's very composable and then you
discretize because it must eventually go
through the discrete interface that is
your screen
>> gotcha
okay so I guess that brings me to my
next question which is you know what can
functional reactive programming what
types of problems can it solve like why
do we even care about it right and it
seems to me like you mentioned graphics
and I saw some stuff during my brief
look up that you know it's great for
animations and graphics and you like
click events in game programming and
stuff like that
>> yeah it definitely is
and it was sort of I believe the
conception of FRP came from
Conal Elliott listening to a talk and it
was to talk on functional animation and
someone after the talk suggests that
they noticed that the values were sort
of a function from the natural numbers
to your domain of the domain of the
problem they suggest that why not have
these things be a function from the real
numbers to this and that's sort of to
avoid all the nasty interpolation that
has to go on if you're working in a
discrete domain
>> gotcha
>> and just like with our vector graphics
example it's doing what that does for
the space domain to the time domain and
that helps with things like animation so
let's say I want to slow in or slow out
I can do that because I'm not making any
premature assumptions about what's going
to happen over time
>> okay
>> it sort of we're not throwing away any
information preemptively and an FRP that
has interesting consequence of always
having access to your past and that
leads to for example being able to write
functions that accumulate the events
that have happened before
>> okay so maybe
handling state
>> yeah exactly
for example let's say I have an event
that invokes a function that counts that
that's a count every time someone comes
into the room something like that okay I
can then use an accumulator function to
see how many people entered the room
over all
>> right
>> and so on
same thing with clicks for
example let's say I'm just clicking
around just that would be a very simple
program that you know you click around
for a bit and then afterwards you
accumulate how many clicks happen
that is interesting consequence is that
I would encourage the listeners to go it
will probably leave a link to it but
it's something called FRP Zoo and it has
an example of how various FRP libraries
handle that problem of counting clicks
>> gotcha
>> because it turns out to be
somewhat non predictable in certain
libraries of it sound interesting
>> yeah so it sounds like you're examples
either a fire marshal or a click game
programmer would have a great time with
FRP sure but so I guess so what what
makes FRP interesting to you like why
why FRP versus you know other paradigms
>> well it's it's very
the two fundamental properties of it
that make it very interesting for me for
example with continuous time we have the
advantage of composability for reasons
we'll get into when we get more into the
semantics part of it but as it turns out
the central abstraction of FRP
>> mm-hm
>> which are behaviors they are
semantically the same thing as functions
so it's interesting to have a way
of thinking of our problem in terms of
continuous values in a way that's that
allows us to leverage what's already in
our language and having functions as
first-class citizens arguably really to
do this that is a prerequisite of it
that you have functions that's a
first-class citizen it's sort
of working with the very nature of
functional programming and this I feel
like things like state machines and so
on our we're sort of working against our
nature it was when working in Haskell
essentially and another reason is that
when you have when you represent time as
a continuous thing in your program you
have infinitesimally small both
theoretically infinitesimally small
points so problems like that these two
things happen at the same time are a bit
easier to answer because they
just both point to that same
infinitesimal point
>> okay
>>and so if that
allows us to reconcile signals that have
different sample rates for example if I
have something that happens every other
day and something that's happening every
second I don't need to do any sort of
complicated you know thinking to figure
out when these two things happen at the
same time
>> I see okay so simplifies
things a little bit in that regard then
>> yeah exactly
>> actually a lot a bit yeah
>> and and to go back
to composability the reason we would why
composability would be a bit more
difficult if we were to discretize
prematurely is that error builds up
>> ah yes
>> so a product composing approximations is
sounds like a headache to me personally
so I would rather work with an
abstraction that behaves like functions
because a little secret they are and that's what
makes is really interesting to me it's
just it just feels like an extension of
what we're already working with
>> oh nice
all right well since we we covered what
FRP can solve we covered what makes it
interesting to you is there anything
else you would like to add or should we
move on to examples of FRP in the wild
>> oh yeah we can move on to some examples
up I would like to maybe go over the
semantics of FFP a little bit be
>> sure
yeah
>> so I'd mentioned behaviors and
behaviors are the central abstraction
and FRP behaviors for percent values
that evolve continuously over time
they're sort of the way we represent the
dynamics of what we're dealing with
and then we have a secondary abstraction
which are events they represent discrete
events that
>> yeah it might have like a
mouse click or whatever else have you
>> yeah exactly and so the second
abstraction the secondary abstraction
and FRP at least in this instance of FRP
the more classic one because in a lot of
more modern sort of implementations of
it events are not necessarily secondary
and at times they becomes a primary
subject of discussion but we're not
dealing with that here mostly because
FRP is a very large zoo and
>> okay yeah
>> and there's a lot of
discussion around that that I myself I'm
still wrapping my head around and this
is also an encouragement for listeners
for discussion you know if you're and
read it please tell me all the things I
messed up but because I'm learning just
as much as anyone else
>> yeah well I mean
I think we're all constantly learning
but yeah yeah
>> I just would really love
to hear about this it's always some very
spicy discussion go ahead so our
secondary abstraction events we can
really just think of them as an infinite
list of pairs of time values and it's
sort of like our discreet sampling of
our time and it becomes an infinite list
of pairs of time and our event value and
you know so that could be what position
was the mouse and at this point in time
and then becomes an event and then a
then over time that becomes a list of
pairs of a mouse position
>> so that seems
like a pretty powerful thing actually
like yeah think about like um but that
seems incredibly handy
>> yeah for sure and
the fact that these things for example
events they it it derives functor and
applicate if we obviously have things
like fmap that have very interesting
meanings to our to FRP for example if
there's a an extension of fmap apply
for that takes in a behavior that
contains some sort of functionality in
it and an event a and when this event
happens at that time it will modify the
event into another one that it's sort of
like mapping that dynamics of this
behavior on to an event in changing the
how this event behaves
>> okay
>> it serve
like an application of dynamics and that
seems really powerful to me that's just
one of the reasons this fascinates me so
much the fact that we can talk about
composing dynamics and applying dynamics
to events also the ability to
think of your problem as flows of things
is very interesting to me because sort
of that analogy of flowing seems to work
very well like for example when I'm
filtering a behavior that just seems to
me like literally filtering a flow of
things
>> get you yeah yeah yeah yeah
>> it's
just semantically very very interesting
>> mm-hmm
>> the semantics being so clearly defined
and having just a very expressive way of
talking about these things is helpful to
me personally it just clicks with me
quite a bit Oh
>> expressiveness
that's very helpful
>> yeah exactly
and also a lot of the talks I've seen
reference why that you know that paper why
functional programming matters because
it seems to be that a lot of the stuff
in that paper why functional
programming matters really translates
into why FRP matters and that's going back
to really to me this being sort of an
extension of what we expect from a pure
functional language
>> ok cool Jose seems
like we've been covering the
specifications of FRP so what what about
the implementation of FRP or have you
seen any in the wild recently that kind
of catch your attention
>> yeah one of the
main complaints that I've seen thrown
out by the person who sort of came
because I came up with the concept of
FRP at least in this version of it he
doesn't feel like there's any accurate
implementations of FRP in the world
though there are some that get very
close and I'm sure I think I believe
he's mentioned
that sodium I believe has some very
accurate one but the one that's
>> like
sodium is in like a S O D I U M
cool
>> so the implementation that's caught
my eye the most has been there spent two
reactive banana Yampa but Yampa I would
rather not get into because that's arrow
eyes
FRP
>> that's the that was used in a Quake
clone I think
>> yeah right it is very
exciting yeah yeah
I wish I could talk about it but that
would take a while and I
I have not explored it enough to be able
to talk about it yes over-reactive
banana is fairly close to the
specification we just described and it's
also very well documented and has a few
tutorials and a really cool wiki page
with some funny fake testimonials that I
would encourage everyone listening to
look at yeah reactive banana implements
you know the behavior abstraction the
event abstraction and it has most of the
things you would you would see in the
specification which we will link a talk
in some slides by Conal specified the
specification of like like the actual
API specification
>> gotcha
>> that would take a
bit of talking because it's symbolic so
it's kind of awkward to
>> 15 minutes
>> yeah
so yeah reactive banana is a really good
one
a it has a really funny tutorial which
is implementing the world's worst
synthesizer there's been quite a bit of
success with FRP and music and sound
programming
>> that's that's really cool
>> pretty interesting
>> if you haven't
guessed already I'm completely a game
nerd too so
>> yeah so this just very good
stuff for most people actually
>> awesome well any other FRP
implementations out in the wild that you
can think of
>> a net wired looked
interesting to me but I believe that
once deprecated but it's another arrow
iced one but I believe I mentioned this
earlier there is the there is a
repository called FRP zoo which allows
you to explore
oh the at least the most popular FRP
libraries out there and it has a way of
testing out how they behave by that
click example I'm accumulating clicks
and so on
>> gotcha
okay and we'll probably link that in in
with this podcast I'm along with several
other links
>> yeah and there is a strange
loop talk by the creator of elm I guess
back in back when Elm started it was a
first order FRP implementation and he
goes over the various categories of FRP
and that's a very good way to get
started churning out and to the zoo of
FRP
>> yeah nice
>> all right
I would also like to mention that I by
no means I'm an expert in this and this
very much an exploratory discussion
there's just something that was very
interesting to me and I thought hey it'd
be a cool topic to just get people
talking about it because it I I think
this topic warrants a lot more
exploration there certainly is but I
like to make more people wear it in case
they were not
>> sure yeah like like me I
was not aware about FRP until just
recently yeah yeah and I have learned a
lot just from talking to with you today
>> it's just a really fascinating thing and
yeah any any knowledge that anyone might
have out there I am very open to it is
>> constantly learning you're not learning
what are you doing it could
>> have a
little bit less dumb every day
>> my wife might claim them that's a huge
challenge but yeah
>> i believe in you dustin
>> all right well thanks
for being on the show with me today Jose
>> well thank you this was really fun
>> and
I'd like to thank our audience for
listening to the Haskell Weekly podcast
if you liked what you heard find out
more at our website haslellweekly.news
also please rate and review us on
iTunes it helps a lot haskell weekly is
brought to you by IT Pro TV the tech
skills development platform for IT
professionals and they also happen to be
our employer so yeah
send your sys admins and network admins
to www.itpro.tv for all of their
learning needs thanks again for
listening we'll see you again next week
see ya